From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[music]
For years, social media companies have
relied on an [music] impenetrable First
Amendment protection to shield them from
legal claims that their products are
dangerous to [music] children.
But now, a new cluster of plaintiffs are
trying a different tact.
Today, my colleague Siccilia Kong
[music] explains why these lawsuits pose
an existential threat to social media
giants and how those companies are
likely [music] to defend themselves.
It's Thursday, [music]
January 29th.
Trouble for Tik Tok as a group of
attorney generals in several states look
into whether the video sharing platform
Tik Tok is harmful for children.
Internal research at Facebook found that
its photo sharing app Instagram can harm
the [music] mental health of millions of
young users.
>> Research shows 95% of teens are on
social media. More than a third say
they're on constantly. For young people,
the Tik Tok platform is like digital
[music] nicotine.
>> One chart showed 21% of girls in the US
felt somewhat worse or much worse after
using Instagram.
>> Social media taught me things about
myself that I didn't even know, [music]
like how I had an ugly nose or how my
weight wasn't the proper weight. Social
media said the solution to these things
[music] wasn't self-acceptance. Social
was products [music]
and sometimes even surgeries.
Unregulated social media is a weapon of
mass destruction that [music] continues
to jeopardize the safety, privacy, and
well-being of all American youth. It's
time to act.
>> As a dad of three, I'm [music] angered
and horrified. As an attorney general, I
along with my colleagues across [music]
the country are taking action to do
something about it.
Cecilia, welcome to the Daily. Thanks
for having me. So, Cecilia, we've talked
a lot on this show about the claims that
social media is harmful for children,
that it can lead to mental health
disorders, social isolation, and there
have been all sorts of attempts over the
years to really curb the reach and
influence of these social media
platforms. Now we have this new crop of
lawsuits and I want to understand how
are these lawsuits any different from
previous attempts that we've seen to
regulate or reign in these companies.
>> So these social media companies have for
years faced really tough scrutiny and
criticism for being too powerful
>> and crushing competition for hosting
content that is false. all kinds of
harms related to the kind of content
that is hosted on these platforms. But
the cases that are about to begin this
week in trials is really different in
that there are thousands of individuals,
school districts and state attorneys
generals that have come together in a
series of lawsuits that are arguing the
same one thing, which is that social
media is addictive. and that the
addictive nature of these platforms have
led to a bevy of personal injuries
including anxiety, depression, suicidal
thoughts, eating disorders.
>> So what's really different is this is
less about the content they host and
this is more about the nature of the
technologies and this is a really novel
legal theory. It's essentially social
media's big tobacco moment which led as
you know to many years of litigation
against the tobacco companies and
ultimately led to the decline of smoking
and so many in social media see this as
a really existential moment. So
basically the crux of this is that these
are personal injury claims, right? And
that effectively allows the plaintiffs
to sidestep what has traditionally
shielded these companies from liability,
which is their free speech defense.
That's exactly right, Rachel. What the
lawyers in these cases and the
plaintiffs are trying to do is to get
around that legal shield that the social
media companies have been able to use to
protect themselves in court. and they're
saying, "No, this is actually not about
speech at all. This is about you
companies creating and engineering
technologies to be harmful and that
those are violations of state and
federal consumer laws."
>> So, let's walk through these cases. How
are they making that claim specifically?
>> So, this year we will see two big
batches of trials begin in all of these
cases that have been filed. And the
first batch that takes place in Los
Angeles include nine plaintiffs. Nine
trials, separate trials by these
different plaintiffs. They're all
individuals all claiming that when they
were young, when they were minors, they
became addicted to social media and they
suffered these harms. And these nine
cases, they're known as bellweathers
because they've been picked out of
thousands of lawsuits filed by
individuals against the social media
companies. and they're seen as very
representative of the many different
charges and experiences that individuals
have had and suffered as they claim by
becoming addicted to these social media
companies.
>> So the first case and trial that begins
is of a individual who's goes by the
initials KGM.
She is a now 20-year-old from Chico,
California. And she has said that she
created her first social media account
on YouTube at the age of [music] 8. She
then joined Instagram at the age of 9
and musically, which is now known as Tik
Tok at the age of 10 and Snapchat at 11.
So, she's been using all the social
media platforms for a long time. And her
mom said that she had no idea that these
platforms could be dangerous and [music]
could become so addictive to her child.
And she only figured that out after
watching a news program where she
learned about [music] the potential
harms of social media. Her mom said that
if she had known how potentially harmful
these sites [music] were, she would have
prevented her daughter from perhaps even
having a phone and using the apps.
[music]
And what KGM, the plaintiff, is arguing
is that the social media platforms were
incredibly alluring to her and that she
got hooked. And [music] these very
addictive products that use features
like infinite scrolling, meaning it's
just so easy to keep scrolling and
scrolling and things like autoplay
videos where [music] right after you
finish a video, the next one's queued up
before you even think about it. and
algorithms that direct you and recommend
particular [music]
content that she has found to be very
toxic. That all these features [music]
led her to overuse social media and
become addicted. And that in turn led to
lots of mental health problems including
anxiety, depression, [music]
suicidal thoughts and body image issues
for her. H.
[music]
So these are the kinds of claims that I
think a lot of people have become
familiar with by now. The idea that
young people can develop any number of
mental and emotional conditions from
repeated exposure to social media
platforms. What is some of the other
litigation that you're watching?
>> So the next big wave begins around June
in federal court. They're all bundled
together and they're brought by
attorneys general in dozens of states as
well as school districts. And those are
really interesting, Rachel, in that they
are charging the companies with being a
public nuisances that the fact that they
as school districts and states have had
to shoulder the costs of mental health
services, phone programs within schools,
all kinds of programs to deal with a
youth crisis. And so they are suing the
companies for monetary damages. And
they're also saying that they would like
to see big changes within the companies
that the platforms have to give up some
of these addictive technology features.
>> Given that these are all personal injury
claims, what do the plaintiffs actually
need to prove in order to prevail in
court?
>> What these plaintiffs have to prove is
that social media is linked to
addiction. And that's going to be hard.
It's going to be a new sort of argument
that hasn't been tested before. And so
they're going to have to show that there
is expert evidence that the use of tools
like infinite scrolling on Tik Tok and
on Instagram and autoplay of video are
features that have led to compulsive use
and that there is a direct link between
the technology and behavior.
And they'll also have to show that these
companies knew all along that their
products were harmful and that they
withheld what they knew from the public.
>> So what's the best evidence that the
plaintiffs have to show what you're
describing as a causal link between the
technology and the harm?
So, there have been numerous studies
done on the mental health effects of
social media. But what the plaintiffs
are going to really rely on is hundreds
of thousands of documents that they've
collected in discovery ahead of these
trials that the plaintiff's lawyers say
show that the companies knew that there
was a problem and they found internally
that there was a lot of troubling
evidence about their products and how
they affected young people. For example,
in 2018,
Meta began studying how beauty filters
on Instagram.
>> Beauty filters, just to be clear, those
are the filter you can put on your face
or somebody else's face to make them
more beautiful, to just alter the image,
right?
>> Yes. And they began studying that in
2018 and um decided in 2019 after a lot
of backlash publicly that they would ban
the filter. But that same year in 2019,
Mark Zuckerberg, the CEO, considered
bringing the filters back to Instagram.
These were big drivers of engagement and
young people like to use them.
>> And employees within the company
implored him not to, including an
executive, because she said they were
really just so toxic for particularly
young girls. and she said that her own
daughter suffered from body dysmorphia
and she sent an email directly to
Zuckerberg asking him to reconsider. He
ignored the email and decided in 2020 to
reinstate the beauty filters. And so
lawyers for KGM are going to point to
these internal documents and say that
this is really the proof that the
company not only studied the problem,
they recognized there was a problem and
yet they did not tell the public about
the problem. They allowed the tools to
continue operating.
>> And what are the plaintiffs asking for
specifically? Obviously money, but can
you just give us a little bit more
specifics on their demands?
>> The plaintiffs are asking, as you said,
for monetary damages, and they are also
asking for changes to the designs of
these platforms. So, they're going to
ask for stronger age verification and
tools to make sure that underage users
are no longer able to escape the terms
and service and and use the platforms.
They'll probably also ask for more
parental controls and that the companies
remove addictive features like infinite
scroll and autoplay of videos and snap
streaks.
>> I'm really going to show my age here,
Cecilia, but what is a snap streak? Oh,
so a snap streak is it's kind of a game,
and this is why it's been accused of
being addictive. It's messaging between
two people. And the idea is to create a
streak of messages between two people.
And you maintain a streak by
communicating every day and sending
snaps, which are usually visuals, like a
photo or some sort of a video or some
sort of a message. And you keep your
streak going if you communicate every
day. You lose your streak if you stop
even for one day.
>> I see. And that does seem very clearly
like an example of a tool that is
designed to keep you on the platform as
much as possible, which is part of the
business model, right? That's what these
companies are trying to do with their
users. So it makes sense that if you
take those features away, that could
pose, as you said, kind of an
existential threat to the entire
business model.
>> That's right. And it's important to keep
in mind that the business model is
advertising. And what really fuels
advertising revenue is engagement,
>> right?
>> Engagement is at the heart of this. And
these tools are meant to keep people
more engaged.
>> So you can see why these trials are
really so potentially damaging for these
companies.
>> [music]
>> And so that's why we've seen two
companies, Snap and [snorts and music]
Tik Tok, settle the very first case with
KGM.
[music] We don't know the terms of those
settlements, but Meta and YouTube are
still scheduled to go to trial as
defendants in KGM's lawsuit [music] and
appear very determined to continue to
take this to trial.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Cecilia, if these lawsuits are so
existential potentially for some of
these social media companies, why would
some of them not settle the way that Tik
Tok and Snap did with that first case?
Presumably the money that they would
have to pay to settle is nothing
compared with having to alter an entire
business model, right? So why even take
the risk and go to trial? Well, there
are many trials that are scheduled first
of all. So even though two companies
were able to settle with KGM in this
first case, there are numerous more in
the state court as well as in federal
court going forward. The other thing to
keep in mind is that the companies,
especially Meta and YouTube, really feel
strongly that they have a good case on
their side and they will bring up speech
protections. Like you mentioned, Rachel,
they're going to say that there is a law
known as section 230 of the
Communications Decency Act that shields
internet companies from the content they
host. because section 230 has been so
broad and so strongly used in their
favor in so many different instances and
so they're feeling pretty confident that
they can rely on that legal shield once
again.
>> In addition, they reject the idea that
social media can be linked to personal
injury and the company's lawyers are
expected to argue that there are many
factors that go into mental health
issues. They're going to say that it's
multiffactorial. could be school
problems, stress with friends, there
could be all kinds of factors that lead
to anxiety, depression, and other me
mental health disorders and not social
media alone, right? And the causal link
does in fairness feel like something
worth grappling with, right? Because how
do you distinguish the impact, for
example, of social media from a culture
that promotes certain beauty standards
and certain body types, right? like is
it actually possible to isolate and
prove causation back to a specific
social media platform?
>> What the plaintiff's lawyers are going
to try to do is to again draw from all
the internal documents they've collected
and they will try to show how the push
to increase engagement and to make their
products sticky and even addictive. But
ultimately it comes down to a jury in
these California cases.
Juries will decide the subsequent cases
as well and that might be favorable for
the plaintiffs because everyone has a
story about social media. We know for
example that the majority of American
parents see social media as a problem
and yet the companies have so far
escaped scrutiny. Cecilia, if this does
end up being social media's big tobacco
moment and they lose these cases in
court and a jury decides that this is in
fact an addictive product, that means
that we have an entire generation of
kids who are now addicted.
And so I wonder, we've been talking this
whole conversation a lot about what
happens to the social media companies,
but what happens to these children that
have essentially been the guinea pigs
for this massive social experiment?
Remember decades ago when the trials
began against big tobacco? It seemed
crazy and really far-fetched to accuse
the companies of creating an addictive
and harmful product. But they did. And
with social media, with all of these
young people who have been blamed for
years for being unable to regulate their
use of these social media apps, the
conversation might change. the blame
could lie in a different place with the
social media companies. Now, that won't
take back the experiences of so many
young people who say they've been harmed
by these social media platforms,
but it could profoundly change the
conversation in our society.
[music]
>> Cecilia Kong, thank you so much for your
time.
>> Thanks for having me, Rachel. [music]
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Wednesday, [music] the Federal
Reserve voted to keep interest rates at
their current levels despite enormous
pressure from President Trump to cut
rates. Two Fed governors, both [music]
appointed by President Trump, cast
dissenting votes. But Fed Chairman
Jerome Powell continues to reject
Trump's demands for a rate cut, even
after the administration [music] opened
an unusual criminal investigation this
month into Powell's conduct. [music]
And
>> our founders debated extensively over
which branch of government should have
the power to declare [music] or initiate
war. Virtually unanimously they decided
and what was entered into the
constitution was that the declaration or
initiation of war would be the [music]
power of congress. Many
>> in a series of pointed exchanges on
Wednesday, senators of both parties,
including Republican Rand Paul of
Kentucky pressed Secretary of State
Marco Rubio [music] to explain why
neither he nor President Trump consulted
with Congress before sending US troops
into Venezuela to arrest and remove the
country's president.
So I would ask you, if a [music] foreign
country bombed our air defense missiles,
captured and removed our president, and
blockaded our country, would that be
considered an act of war? Would it be an
act of war?
>> We just don't believe that this
operation comes anywhere close to the
constitutional definition of war.
>> But would it be an act of war if someone
did it to us? Of course, it would be an
act of war. I'm calling anti-war. During
the hearing, Rubio refused [music] to
rule out future US military action in
Venezuela, but said that President Trump
has no desire to send American troops
back to the country.
Today's episode was [music] produced by
Michelle Bona and Shannon Lynn. It was
edited by Lexi Dio and Michael Benois.
Contains music by Rowan Demyto and Dan
Powell, [music]
and was engineered by Chris Wood.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it [music] for the daily. I'm
Rachel Abrams. See you tomorrow.